JUDY WOODRUFF: But first, we
examine the results from our
latest "PBS NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll, the president's continued
attacks against the media, and
the battle over health care
on Capitol Hill.
It's time for Politics Monday
with Tamara Keith of NPR and
Stu Rothenberg, senior editor
at Inside Elections.
And welcome to you both on this
day before the Fourth of July.
Thank you for wearing
red, white and blue.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, the
White House is saying they
fully respect that some version
of a reform plan that the
Republicans like is going to
pass the Senate, going to pass
Congress.
What does your
reporting tell you?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It's possible, though,
at the moment, Mitch McConnell
has described the effort to
find a health care bill that
50 Republicans can support
in the Senate as like
working with a Rubik's Cube.
Like, you move one piece,
and then some other piece
moves out of the way.
It's a very delicate negotiation
that's happening right now.
It's not clear that
they will get there.
Some of the Medicaid tests
that were just discussed in
the last segment are a hangup.
There are other hangups for
more conservative Republicans.
But they are highly motivated
to get to a win, and so you
can't discount the motivation
that exists to find a way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, I think I
have you asked this question
before, so what is the calculus?
And if you're a Senate
Republican, what
are you thinking?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Yes, I think the
choice is not passing anything,
or passing something
that's going to be broadly
unpopular, but is going
to find a lot of support
from within Republican
and conservative circles.
That's the choice.
And for most Republicans,
I think for most
Republicans strategists,
campaign strategists,
passing something is
a strong imperative.
It's , you have to do
something for the base,
even if you risk alienating
the larger electorate.
For individual members, that
has different equations.
For somebody like Lisa Murkowski
in Alaska, Susan Collins,
Rand Paul, Rob Portman, they
have their own considerations,
ideological or state-based.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it
still looks, Tam, like
it's really hard to square
the circle or circle
the square.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, at this
point, it does look that
way, but you know what?
It kind of looked that
way in the House, too.
It looked like it was
a dead bill, so we were
calling it a zombie bill.
And then next thing you
knew, boom, they passed it.
They came up with a compromise
that didn't seem to materially
change anything, and yet
it passed, and they were able
to move it over to the Senate.
And so, you know, don't
declare this thing dead.
It could be back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So maybe,
Stu, where there's a
will, there's a way.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And where
there's a Mitch McConnell,
there's always a possibility.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, so
let's talk about something
else, and that is, Tam, back to
the president's tweets.
He's tweeted I guess a couple
of times about health care,
but he's tweeted a number of
times about the news media.
Last week, it was the
cable show hosts Mika
Brzezinski, Joe Scarborough.
But yesterday there was this new
tweet where it was sort of an
edited video of the president
pummeling a man on the
ground, we're showing it
here, with CNN over his face.
How do we interpret this?
TAMARA KEITH: There are
many ways to interpret it,
but, you know, President
Trump, as a candidate
and now as a president,
to use the wrestling
analogy, he wanted a heel.
He needs a heel.
He needs a foe.
And, you know, he has
decided that the media is
going to be his foe, his
heel in this wrestling
match that is his presidency.
And so, I mean, that image,
that video is a pretty perfect
description of the way he
is approaching this.
Having that fight, having
that feud really excites
some people who support him.
Now, there are others who
are turned off by it and, you
know, we could go down the road
of the dangers of having
a video that looks
like it is encouraging
violence against members
of the media, but it works
for -- this is the same Donald
Trump who ran for president
and won.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does
it advance his cause now?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes,
first of all, I think Tam
is exactly right on this.
I would just add two things.
One is, it advances his
cause by mobilizing and
motivating his base.
They love it when he
attacks the media.
They really think it's exciting
and they agree with him.
And I'm sure we will talk
about how the media is not
held in the highest regard.
Second of all, he enjoys it.
It's all -- look, let's
remember, Judy, he did that
in that wrestling show.
He actually did that.
It's his ego.
He wants to be the
center of attention.
focus of everything.
And I think he just has a
lot of fun when he does that.
And for Donald Trump, it's
more fun to do that than to
actually get into the weeds in
public policy.
TAMARA KEITH: And I was talking
to Republican consultant today
who was like, yes, it's a
distraction, but maybe it's a
welcome distraction, because if
the people are talking about his
tweets and talking about
WrestleMania, then they aren't
talking about Medicaid cuts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course,
there's been the role of a
free press in a democracy, one
of the pillars of our form of
government in this country.
But we can -- we could talk
about that another time.
I do want to raise in our
last few minutes this new CNN
-- I'm sorry -- I had CNN on
the brain from the video -- the
new poll that the "NewsHour"
and NPR did in conjunction
with Marist, where, one of
the things we looked at, Stu,
exactly what you mentioned, high
distrust of the news media.
More than two-thirds of
Americans, they were asked,
what do you think about
trust in institutions?
And here it is.
Thirty-seven percent, a good
deal or a great amount of trust
in the Trump administration,
30 percent, even less, trust in
the news -- in the media, and
20, about on same par as trust
in Congress.
And you go on to see trust in
the intelligence community,
twice that much, 60 percent, and
in the courts, 60 percent.
But the bottom line here,
Stu, is that the media may
be a good whipping boy.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes, and I
think the public sees the media
as a political institution,
just as they see
the White House, the
president and Congress.
And, right now, nobody
trusts politicians or
people covering politicians.
It's a horrible trend.
I look back at the Gallup
numbers in the early
1970s, and those of us
in the media are regarded
much worse than
we were back then.
But it's been occurring over
the last couple of decades.
TAMARA KEITH: Republican
Senator Ben Sasse over the
weekend said something that goes
in conjunction with the tweets
and fits with these numbers too.
He said he was concerned
that the president was
trying to weaponize distrust.
And then here's the quote:
"We are at risk of getting to
a place where we don't have
a shared set of public facts.
The republic will not work if
we don't have shared facts."
These numbers are part of a
very long trend of institutions
losing trust from the American
people.
And that puts America at risk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
in the last 30 seconds, I want
to show our audience and you
this -- the other
question in the poll.
Since President Trump
was elected, has the
overall tone and level
of civility in Washington
gotten worse?
Seventy percent.
Stayed the same, 20 improved, 6.
Stu, I guess no surprise here.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No.
Some people actually see
what they want to see.
Strong Republican -- 17
percent said that it improved.
And white evangelicals,
10 percent had --
they said improved.
But the overall sample
is very clear and, in
fact, very correct.
Things have deteriorated.
They're coarser.
They're more vulgar.
It's not a time of better tone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are
glad to promote civility
here at the "NewsHour."
Stu Rothenberg, Tamara
Keith, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can find more about these
findings from our joint
"PBS NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll.
And that's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.